Automated Cropland Mapping of Continental Africa using 
Google Earth Engine Cloud Computing

Jun Xionga,b,*, Prasad S Thenkabaila, Murali K Gummac, Pardhasaradhi Teluguntlaa,b, 
Justin Poehnelta, Russ Congaltond, Kamini Yadavd
aU. S. Geological Survey (USGS), 2255, N. Gemini Drive, Flagstaff, AZ 86001, USA
bBay Area Environmental Research Institute (BAERI), 596 1st St West Sonoma, CA 95476, USA
cInternational Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru, Hyderabad, India
dUniversity of New Hampshire, NH, USA
*Corresponding author: jxiong@usgs.gov, pthenkabail@usgs.gov

Highlights 
-	Baseline reference 250-m cropland layer of Africa for the year 2014 produced through rigorous analysis;
-	An ensemble decision-tree automated cropland mapping algorithm (ACMA) was developed for Africa;
-	ACMA produced cropland products of Africa for independent years 2003-2014 in Google Earth Engine;
-	ACMA automatically and accurately produces cropland products for the past-, present-, and future-years.

Abstract
The estimation of agricultural croplands using satellite-derived remotely sensed data remains a challenge in Africa because of heterogeneous and fragmental landscape, complex crop cycles, and limited access to local knowledge. Currently, consistent, continent-wide routine cropland mapping of Africa does not exist with most studies focused either on certain portions of the continent or at the most a one-time effort at mapping the continent at coarse resolution remote sensing. In this research, we overcome these limitations through automated cropland mapping algorithms (ACMAs), that capture exhaustive knowledge-base on agricultural croplands of Africa available in this project through: (a) extensive ground based training samples, (b) sub-meter to five meter very high resolution imagery (VHRI), and (c) local knowledge captured during field visits and\or sourced through country reports and literature, and then applying them through ACMAs to discern specific agricultural cropland information from remotely sensed data. The study uses time-series Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer MOD13Q1, every 16-day composite of normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) at 250-m resolution, and data of the entire African continent. Based on these data, the study first produced accurate reference cropland layers or RCLs (cropland extent\areas, irrigation versus rainfed, cropping intensities, crop types or dominance, and croplands versus cropland fallows) for the year 2014 that provided an overall accuracy of around 90% in different agro-ecological zones (AEZs) of Africa. The knowledge-base in the RCL for the year 2014 (RCL2014) was then captured and used in the development of the ACMA algorithm. Then, the ACMA derived cropland layers for the year 2014 (ACL2014) were assessed for accuracy by comparing them with the RCL2014, pixel by pixel through an accuracy error matrix that produced an overall accuracy of 96% (kappa=0.72). The cropland areas computed for the 55 African countries in this study was highly correlated with census based MIRCA2000 with R-square values around 0.75. Overall, during the year 2014, the African continent had 260 million hectares of croplands with an additional 36 Mha of cropland fallows. Of the 260 Mha 94.4% (248 Mha) was rainfed and 5.6% (14 Mha) irrigated. Africa has about 15% of the World’s population, but only about 3.5% of World’s irrigation. About 50% of the rainfed and 60% of the irrigated were single crops. Then ACMA algorithm was applied on MODIS 16-day time-series data from the year 2003 through 2014 resulting in accurate, and consistent ACMA derived cropland layers for these years (ACL2003 to ACL2014). The results indicated that over 12 years (2003-2014), on an average, in the African continent: (a) croplands increased by 1 million hectares\yr, and (b) cropland fallows decreased by 1 million hectares\year. ACMA demonstrated the ability to hind-cast (past years), now-cast (present year), and future cast (future years) cropland products rapidly, automatically, and accurately. The African cropland products are released at https://croplands.org/ and the ACMA algorithm is released through: http://geography.wr.usgs.gov/science/croplands/algorithms/africa_250m.html.

Keywords: Cropland mapping, Classification, MODIS, Remote sensing products, Google earth engine, Africa
1. Introduction
The extent, distribution, and characteristics (e.g., irrigation versus rainfed, cropping intensity) of croplands are factors that have long been identified as fundamental influences on agricultural development pathways, food security scenarios, and poverty reduction (Jayne et al., 2014). Estimates show that 52% of the world’s remaining arable land is in Africa (Thomson, 2011), yet most of this land is concentrated in just eight countries (Algeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Morocco, Nigeria, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda), while a number of the remaining countries contain large rural populations clustered in remarkably small areas  (Chamberlin et al., 2014). Demography of Africa is projected to change exponentially, where population is expected to increase from the current 1.2 billion to nearly 4 billion by the end of the century (Gerland et al., 2014). A quarter of the population is undernourished and many countries experience famines in sub-Saharan Africa (Clover, 2003). In this context, timely and dependable information on agricultural croplands of Africa is a prerequisite necessity to: (i) isolate the agricultural croplands to assess crop water use, crop productivity, and crop water productivity, and (ii) investigate how the croplands respond to different climatic conditions(Waldner et al., 2015).  

Global land use\land cover (LULC)  products such as global land cover 2000  (Mayaux et al., 2004), GlobCover 2005/2009 (Arino et al., 2005), Global Land Cover-SHARE (Latham, 2014) , and MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) Land Cover (Friedl et al., 2002) do have cropland classes. However, to use these products as accurate and reliable cropland estimation for practical purpose is questionable. For example, Cropland estimates derived from GlobCover are 20% higher than those derived from MODIS globally (Fritz et al., 2011a, 2011b). Further, spatial location of the croplands between any two of these global LULC products vary substantially. These factors have led to differences in cropland areas between various products which is as much as staggering 300 million hectares globally (varying from 1.5 to 1.8 billion hectares). For example, the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the United Nations (UN) estimates that, around the year 2010, there was 319 Mha of croplands in Africa compared to the significantly lower MODIS land cover and GlobCover estimates of 277 Mha and 152 Mha, respectively. There are many reasons for such differences such as: 1. these products are generally more focused on LULC systems than on agricultural systems, 2. definition issues, 3. resolution of the data used, 4. other data characteristics (e.g., spectral, radiometric), and 5. Methods adopted. Further, in these products croplands are not a single land cover class, but are contained within mosaic of classes without specific agricultural information such as irrigation, cropping intensity, or crop type. All of these factors lead to substantial uncertainties in cropland assessment and related products f cropland water use and food security assessment and reporting.

Further, there are several cropland studies. Time-series remotely sensed data are established as effective tool in cropland mapping (Esch et al., 2014) and have been  successfully implemented at regional-scale(Begue et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2014; Gumma et al., 2014; Helmholz et al., 2014) as well as at global scale(Chen et al., 2015; Pittman et al., 2010; Radoux et al., 2014; Salmon et al., 2015; Thenkabail and Wu, 2012; Wang et al., 2015). Various aspects of croplands are mapped such as irrigated areas (Conrad et al., 2016; Peña-Arancibia et al., 2016, 2014; Salmon et al., 2015; Thenkabail and Wu, 2012), rainfed areas (Biradar et al., 2009; Salmon et al., 2015), cropping intensities (Qiu et al., 2014), and crop types (Gumma et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2015; Zhong et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2016), and cropland fallows (Müller et al., 2015).  There are many methods and techniques adopted for cropland classification that include phenology based algorithms (Dong et al., 2015; Jeganathan et al., 2014; Pan et al., 2015), classification regression trees (Deng and Wu, 2013; Egorov et al., 2015; Ozdogan and Gutman, 2008), decision tree algorithms (Friedl and Brodley, 1997; Shao and Lunetta, 2012), fourier harmonic analysis (Zhang et al., 2015) , spectral matching techniques (Dheeravath et al., 2009), support vector machines (Mountrakis et al., 2010), random forest algorithm (Tatsumi et al., 2015) and a number of other machine learning algorithms (DeFries, 2000; Duro et al., 2012; Lary et al., 2015; Pantazi et al., 2016). Many studies adoped supervised and unsupervised classification approaches. Supervised methods (Egorov et al., 2015) rely extensively on in-situ data or on human interpretation of spectral signatures, making the classification process resource-intensive, time-consuming, and difficult to repeat over space and time (Zhong et al., 2014). So, when rich sets of in-situ data are lacking, as is often the case in Africa, supervised approaches lead to uncertainties. Unsupervised approaches require far less in-situ data or human interpretation but they require large volumes of in-situ data for class identification and validation data. 

Specific to continental Africa, amongst existing cropland products there has been large disagreement (Fritz and See, 2008; Giri et al., 2002; Hansen and Reed, 2000; Herold et al., 2008; McCallum et al., 2004) especially in the extent of the cultivated areas and their spatial distribution (Fritz et al., 2010; Salmon et al., 2015; Teluguntla et al., 2015; Thenkabail et al., 2009; Thenkabail and Wu, 2012; Waldner et al., 2015), as a result of fragmented and heterogeneous rural landscapes (Lobell and Asner, 2002) and low agricultural intensification (Pittman et al., 2010) throughout continental Africa. The challenges of mapping cropland in Africa also include: (a) spatial structure of the agricultural landscape (Vancutsem et al., 2012), (b) spectral similarity with grassland, mainly in arid and semi-arid areas (Mayaux et al. with Herold and Woodcock, Antonio di Gregorio, 2006; McCallum et al., 2004), (c) high regional variability in terms of agricultural systems and calendars between the hyper-arid Sahara and other agro-ecological zones (Vintrou et al., 2012). 

Further, the current state-of-art using the above methods and approaches is mostly limited to producing cropland products for a given time period, or for a growing season, or for a particular year. Such a process is often performed by extensive collection of reference data, rigorous analysis, and testing. The biggest difficulty in cropland mapping is in lack of algorithms that accurately reproduce cropland products year after year or season after season. So, more recently, there are efforts at producing cropland products by developing automated algorithms (Jamali et al., 2014; Waldner et al., 2015; Yan and Roy, 2014). Thenkabail and Wu developed a rule-based ensemble decision-tree Automated algorithm to produce cropland  versus non-croplands across years for Tajikistan and California (Thenkabail and Wu, 2012; Wu et al., 2014). Waldner et al. (2015) used a baseline map generated from five knowledge-based temporal features to train an automated support vector machines (SVM) classifier on selected areas in Argentina, Belgium, Ukraine, and China. However, these automated algorithms are currently applied only over small pilot studies and not over large areal extent such as the African Continent. 

Given the above discussions, the overarching goal of this research was to develop and test automated cropland mapping algorithms (ACMAs) over a very large area such as a continent with an ability to automatically and accurately re-produce cropland products year after year and\or season after season using MODIS 250-m 16-day time-series data. Africa was chosen given its importance for food security in the twenty-first century and to address the challenge of mapping complex agricultural systems. The spatial, temporal, and spectral specifications of MODIS are considered as highly suitable for land use and land cover (LULC) classifications, especially for cropland extent and area mapping (Hentze et al., 2016). The Google Earth Engine (GEE) cloud computing platform was used in this project to generate the products as well as collecting reference data. The GEE is a system designed to enable petabyte-scale, scientific analysis and visualization of geospatial datasets. Earth Engine provides a consolidated environment including a massive data catalog co-located with thousands of computers for analysis. The user-friendly front-end provides a workbench environment to allow interactive data and algorithm development, and support for in-the-field activities such as validation, ground-sampling, and crowd-sourcing. We first, develop ensemble decision-tree algorithm ACMA for the year 2014 for the African continent, and then tested and validated for the same year. This was followed by validation of ACMA algorithm for 11 independent years (2003-2013).  Finally, we deploy the ACMA algorithm on Google Earth Engine (GEE) cloud computing platform, so scientists and practitioners can routinely reproduce cropland products of Africa year after year. 
2. Data
2.1 Study Area
The study area included the entire African continent which extends from approximately 38°N to 35°S latitude, occupies 30.3 million km2, and has several distinct geologic and biogeographic regions with varying land cover types. For example, Sahara, the largest hot desert in the world, comprises much of the land found within North Africa, excluding the fertile coastal region situated against the Mediterranean Sea, the Atlas Mountains of the Maghreb, and the Nile Valley of Egypt and Sudan. Savannas, or grasslands, cover almost half of Africa, more than 13 million km2. These grasslands make up most of central Africa, beginning south of the Sahara and the Sahel and ending north of the continents southern tip. Also, 80 percent of Africa’s rain forest is concentrated in central Africa, along the Congo River basin. Swahili Coast, stretches about 1,610 kilometers along the Indian Ocean, from Somalia to Mozambique, where vegetated areas are located on a narrow strip just inland from the coastal sands and heavy cultivation has diminished the diversity of plant species in this interior area. Southern Africa will be the one of the regions in the world whose crop production is most affected by climate change such as higher temperatures and reduced water supplies, along with other factors like biodiversity loss and ecosystems degradation (Lobell et al., 2008). All the raster and vector data in entire Africa continent were produced in Geographic projection (WGS84) at a spatial resolution of 0.0022458 degrees (equivalent to 250 m at the equator). 
2.2 Reference samples repository on Google Earth Engine (GEE)
In-situ samples collected from ground data, is always the first step to establish knowledge for the classifier in classification. Supposed to provide the most accurate information by definition, they are often not an ideal gold standard but degraded by error (Foody, 2010) because of  small samples size, sampling bias and inconsistent labeling. Web-based system for supporting classification have been used in the past for general land cover (Fritz et al., 2009; Tsendbazar et al., 2014). In this paper, web-based data was developed (in addition to extensive ground data) using multiple sources and consolidated on the GEE platform. 

The reference samples repository consists of following components: The project developed a ground data-collection mobile app (https://croplands.org/mobile) that can be downloaded and run on a smart phone device. This mobile app allows users to collect geo-references ground data that includes digital photos, cropland data required for the project (cropland versus cropland fallows, irrigated versus rainfed, cropping intensity). All data so collected from anywhere in the world is automatically uploaded to the project server. All data samples, so collected are further reviewed in the online image-interpretation tool (https://croplands.org/interpret) to ensure that the samples are centered on the farm field using sub-meter to 5 meter very high resolution imagery (VHRI) data from sensors such as Worldview 2, QuickBird, and IKONOS. Reference ground data for Africa were collected through several field campaigns by the project team in May, June, and August 2014 to coincide with the peak cropping seasons in different parts of Africa. Field information was collected from 250 m × 250 m homogeneous plots. A total of 1381 samples were collected from Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mali and Uganda.  Reference data was also collected from several other sources. First, some other global/region projects  (Tateishi et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2014) shared with us valuable reference datasets. In order to incorporate them in our project, we converted their labeling system to be consistent with the labeling scheme of our project. Second, reference cropland samples were also selected from a series of published literature for selected areas of Africa based on detailed studies using VHRI or high resolution imagery such as Landsat (Haack et al., 2015; Kidane et al., 2012; Rembold et al., 2000; Shalaby and Tateishi, 2007; Were et al., 2013; Zucca et al., 2015). These studies provided ~500 validation samples that were uploaded to and analyzed in cropland.org. Third, random samples were collected by interpreting VHRI data. 

Overall, there were 3265 reference samples (Figure 1) spread across the 8 consolidated agro-ecological zones (AEZs) of the African continent. Of these 953 reference samples were collected during field visit by the team and the rest 2312 reference samples were sourced from partners\collaborators (Figure 1). When the full reference samples repository was established through above approaches, every sample was then marked into “training” and “validation” groups.  A random 70%-30% splitting of the 3265 were used to separate 2285 samples for “training” and the rest 953 for “validation”. These validation datasets are publicly available for download at the following address: https://croplands.org/validation-dataset. 
 
Figure 1. The 8 AEZs of Africa and distribution of reference samples. The United Nations (UN) Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) global Agro Ecological Zones (AEZs) and distribution of reference samples repository in Africa continent. [Note: initial 15 AEZs were consolidated to final 8 to eliminate AEZs with zero or insignificant agriculture such as in Sahara Desert].

2.3 250m baseline crop mask for Africa
Ten existing state-of-art studies of African and Global cropland studies (Table 1) were combined to a baseline 250m cropland mask of Africa (Figure 2). First, global 1-km cropland extent map (Teluguntla et al., 2015) was used as a starting point because it provides the distribution of the most consistent global cropland extent map based of 4 well known studies (1. Thenkabail et al., 2009b, Biradar et al., 2009, Thenkabail et al., 2011, 2. Pittman et al., 2010, 3. Yu et al., 2013, and 4. Friedl et al 2010). However, it is clear that each of these four studies have their own inconsistencies (Teluguntla et al., 2015). Thereby, we expanded our investigation of the cropland extent, specifically focused on Africa, by incorporating 10 studies (Table 1) to ensure most comprehensive assessment.  This included products from 250m (MODIS), 300m (MERIS) and even higher 30m (Landsat). Vector datasets such as Africover are converted into a 250 m resolution raster using the “maximum area” criteria, i.e., the feature with the largest area in the cell yields the attribute assigned to that cell. Some of the products (Globcover, Africover and the MODIS-JRC dataset) have used the Land Cover Classification System (LCCS) while others have not. Therefore, those products that have not adopted the LCCS differ in how they define agriculture (i.e., land cover description, land use intensity) since the aims of these products differ. In order to avoid ignoring any significant cropland areas as mapped by different products, all the significant cropland classes were aggregated, plus the classes that include mosaic vegetation like shrubs and grassland where even a small cropland fractions exist. For those products which provide different levels of agricultural land use intensity (0–100%), a visual analysis of the products in comparison with recent sub-meter to 5 meter very high-resolution imagery (VHRI) was then carried out to delineate croplands from non-croplands. Based on the spatial analysis of the 10 products and their interpretations, we derived a consolidated, resampled cropland mask at 250m resolutions for entire Africa. This product (Figure 2) includes: (i) rainfed cropland including rainfed cropland fallow areas, (ii) irrigated cropland including irrigated cropland fallow areas; and (iii) cropland area fractions in otherwise non-cropland areas. Such a comprehensive 250m cropland mask, encompassing 332 Mha, is the starting point for further cropland classification and assessment in this study.

The total cropland areas of Africa (Figure 2) was segmented into eight major agro-ecological zones (AEZs) (Figure 1) of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and used in further studies. The FAO AEZs were classified using geo-referenced global climate, soil, and terrain data and indicates the length of crop growing period at 10km spatial resolution (Fischer et al., 2012). The crop growing period refers to the number of days when average daily temperature is above 5°C and evapotranspiration is above 0.5 of reference evapotranspiration.
Table 1. Datasets used in creating 250m cropland mask of Africa in terms of their reference, data source, resolution, and time interval.

Name	Institution	Source	Resolution	Time 	Classes	Reference
Globcover	ESA	MERIS	300m	2005, 2009	LULC	Arinoothers, 2010
Africover	FAO	Landsat 7	30m	1995-2002	LULC	Kalensky, 2014
LULC 2000	USGS	AVHRR	2000m	2000	LULC	Soulard et al., 2014
GLC 2000	JRC	SPOT	1/112°	2000	LULC	Fritz et al., 2000
MCD12Q1	NASA	MODIS	500m	2004-now	LULC	Leroux et al., 2014
MODIS-JRC	JRC	MODIS, Landsat	250m	2009	LULC	Vancutsem et al., 2013
GCEV1	USGS	MODIS, Landsat	1000m	2010	Cropland	Teluguntla, et al., 2015
Global30	NGCC	Landsat 7	30m	2010	LULC	Chen et al., 2015
FROMGC	CESS	Landsat 7	30m	Circa 2010	LULC	Gong et al., 2013
GRIPC	BU	MODIS	500m	Circa 2005	Cropland	Salmon, et al., 2015
Note: 
AVHRR: Advanced Very High resolution radiometer
MERIS: MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer
MODIS:  Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
SPOT: Satellite Pour l'Observation de la Terre
LULC2000: land use land cover for the nominal year 2000
GLC2000: global land cover for the nominal year 2000
MCD12Q1: MODIS Land Cover Type product
MODIS-JRC: MODIS joint research center
GCEV1: global cropland extent version 1
FROMGC: 30 m global cropland extent derived through multisource data 
GRIPC: global rainfed, irrigated, and paddy croplands
ESA = European Space Agency
FAO = Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
MARS = Monitoring Agricultural Resources
USGS = United States Geological Survey
CESS = Center for Earth System Science
BU = Boston University
NGCC = National Geomatics Center of China
 
Figure 2. Baseline cropland mask of Africa based on 10 pathfinding studies. Aggregated 250m cropland mask derived from 10 previous studies in Africa, including cropland fallow areas (Table 1). This cropland mask covers an area of 332 Mha.
2.4 MODIS NDVI times series product
The MODIS 250m 16-day composite NDVI product (Didan, 2015) were found to have sufficient spatial and temporal resolutions to detect cropland over large area (Wardlow et al., 2005).  In Section 3, NDVI time-series spanning the entire year (January–December 2014) was created for the continental Africa, because of its strength in overcoming the high probability of cloud cover and\or harmattan haze during the monsoon season over much of Africa (Leroux et al., 2014; Vintrou et al., 2012). The year 2014 was chosen as a reference year because most of the ground samples and very high spatial resolution imagery (VHRI) collected in the same year and the annual rainfall in 2014 is also at normal level. 

Hosted on Google Earth Engine, the MYD13 product are computed from daily atmospherically corrected bi-directional surface reflectance that have been masked for water, clouds, heavy aerosols, and cloud shadows.  Google Earth Engine, based on millions of servers around the world and the start-of-the-art cloud-computing and storage capability, has archived a large catalog of earth observation data and enabled the scientific community to work on the trillions of images in parallel processing way (Hansen et al., 2013). One prominent challenge is that native unsupervised classification module in Google Earth Engine are limited, we turned to seek the integration from the NASA Earth Exchange (NEX) supercomputing platform to provide advanced remote sensing data processing and large data analysis based on state-of-the-art supercomputing platform  (Nemani et al., 2011). All the MODIS tiles covering Africa in 2014 were organized as an ImageCollection in Google Earth Engine and then exported as huge parallel netCDF (PnetCDF) slices on NEX, for further clustering.
3. Methodology
3.1 Method overview
The proposed methodology is presented in Figure 3. First, MODIS 16-day 250 NDVI imagery composite of the African continent was stratified by: (1) Masking out the non-cropland area using 250m baseline cropland mask of Africa (Figure 2), (2) Sub-setting masked area into 8 consolidated FAO agro-ecological zones (AEZs) (Figure 1), and (3) clustering each cropland mask of the 8 AEZs into 25 unique clusters using K-means algorithm for a total of 200 classes (25 classes * 8 AEZ masks). Second, ground samples from reference samples’ repository (section 2.2) were split into training part and validation part. The former was used to characterize unique ideal spectral signatures. Third, clustered classes from each of the 8 AEZs generated using k-means algorithm were grouped together through quantitative spectral matching techniques (QSMTs) and the group of similar cluster classes were matched with the ideal spectra to identify and label classes. The class labeling is further verified through ground data, VHRI, field visits, and through external sources. The process lead to an accurate reference cropland layer (RCL) of Africa for the year 2014 (RCL2014). Year 2014 was chosen due to its: (a) normal precipitation year, (b) availability of extensive ground data. The cropland knowledge available in the CRL2014 was then coded in an ensemble decision-tree automated cropland mapping algorithm (ACMA) to accurately replicate cropland products through ACMA generated cropland year for the year 2014 (ACL2014). Once this is achieved accurately, ACMA codes were deployed in the Google Earth Engine via GitHub for independent years (2003 to 2013) to compute ACMA generated cropland products for these years (ACL2000-ACL2013). 
 
Figure 3. Methodology schematics for developing reference cropland product for the year 2014 (RCL2014). Schematic diagram of the methodology framework used to map croplands for continental Africa.
3.2 Classification System and signatures
We mapped four different cropland layers in our product: 1) Cropland extent\area; 2) Irrigated versus rainfed; 3) Cropping intensities: single, double, triple, and continuous cropping; 4) Croplands versus Cropland Fallows; and crop types (Table 2). There are many differences and inconsistencies in definitions of various global products which is one of the major causes of error distribution (Congalton et al., 2014). The FAO cropland database, for example, defines arable land as land that is under temporary crops (double-cropped areas are counted only once), temporary meadows for mowing or pasture, land under market and kitchen gardens, and land temporarily fallow (less than five years) (FAO, 2011).  In the definition, cropland includes all cultivated land under permanent crops, including harvested cropland, crop failure, temporarily fallow or idle land, and cropland used temporarily for pasture; irrigated crop includes all croplands where water from artificial application is delivered to crops one or more times during crop growing season. Harvest must occur at least once per year (except for plantation crops like tea, coffee, rubber, many varieties of nuts and fruits); rainfed crop includes all croplands where no water from any storage or delivery mechanism is utilized, but crops are not flooded. Cropland fallows are mapped separately, regardless of irrigation status, due to their distinct hydrological footprint and unique signature. Within individual AEZs, cropland signatures were created based on ground samples collected in Section 2.2 (Figure 5). A total of 3265 reference samples (Figure 1) spread across the 8 consolidated agro-ecological zones (AEZs) of the African continent were created and used. Of these 953 reference samples were collected during field visit by the team and the rest 2312 reference samples were gathered from numerous other sources (section 2.2). Based on extensive and precise ground knowledge from a large number of samples, from each agro-ecological zones (AEZs), ideal spectral signatures of unique and distinct classes were established for the irrigated areas and rainfed areas (Figure 4). Our focus was to develop such ideal spectral signatures for classes that clearly separate from one another. We found 4 such classes for irrigated and 4 for rainfed in the AEZ 3 (Figure 4). Indeed, these four classes (Figure 4) stood out across AEZs. Classes other than these were either not very distinct\unique, or did not have significant areas and hence were merged into one of the 8 classes (Figure 4). The fallow cropland class was the ninth class, that was common in all AEZs. Establishing the 9 distinct classes (8 classes in Figure 4 and the ninth class of fallow croplands) allows automated ACMA algorithm coding which in turn will facilitate replicating cropland characteristics year after year or season after season.
3.3 Cropland classification within individual FAO Agro-ecological Zones (AEZs)
It is widely accepted that cropland classification accuracies increase when the large areas like continents are stratified and studied separately. After masking out the noncropland area using 250m crop mask (Figure 2), the input dataset was subsetted based on the 8 FAO agro-ecological zones (AEZs, Figure 1). The area in the same AEZ zone has similar characteristics related to land suitability, potential production and environmental impact. An Agro-ecological Zone is a land resource mapping unit, defined in terms of climate, landform and soils, and/or land cover, and having a specific range of potentials and constraints for land use (FAO 1996). The essential elements in defining an AEZs are the growing period, temperature regime and soil mapping unit. Taking presence and importance of agriculture into consideration, Africa was stratified into 8 consolidated AEZs (Figure 1) from the original 15 AEZs. It was rasterized and superimposed.
Table 2. Description of crops mapped in global cropland product for Africa @ 250-m (GCPA250). 
#	Label	Dominant Crops**, ***	Number of Samples
1	Irrigated, SC, season 2*	wheat, barley	8
2	Irrigated, SC, season 1*	maize, rice, millet	14
3	Irrigated, DC,	rice/chili-vegetable, rice-rice	8
4	Irrigated, Continuous	sugarcane, plantation	20
5	Rainfed, SC, season 2	millet, barley, maize, beans, cassava, yam	20
6	Rainfed, SC, season 1	maize, sorghum, tef, wheat, barley, cassava, yam	27
7	Rainfed, DC,	rice-rice, maize-maize, rice-beans/potato/chickpea/pulses	8
8	Rainfed, Continuous	sugarcane, plantation	7
9	Fallow-lands		0
Note: * = season 1: Oct - Mar, season 2: May - Sep
** = as a result of MODIS 250 m pixel resolution (each pixel = ~6.25 hectares) there are almost always more than 1 crop in a pixel (e.g., wheat and rice, or maize, rice, millet)
*** = only dominant crops are mentioned. If a pixel has wheat and barley that are dominant, then only these are mentioned. 

Even for planetary-scale platform for Earth science data like Google Earth Engine (GEE), clustering algorithm like k-means and ISODATA is hard to scale on large areas. In order to drive clustering to massive dataset on terabyte level, Parallel netCDF (PnetCDF ) format was used to store the exported MODIS NDVI times-series data and Message Passing Interface (MPI) k-means (Zhang et al., 2011) algorithm was applied to do the clustering with 2,000 CPUs on NASA AMES super computer. For the total 8 AEZs, K-means cluster results a total 200 unique clusters for the continental Africa, based on their NDVI time-series profile signal. 

A reference cropland layer (RCL) was produced based on best available knowledge-base, leading to the best possible cropland product. RCL was produced for the year 2014 (RCL2014), year for which there was extensive field data and a precipitation normal year. Certain class is firstly matched with ideal spectral library based on the best match using quantitative spectral matching techniques (QSMTs, Thenkabail et al., 2007), and is given a preliminary label such as, for example: “rainfed, single, season 1” (Figure 5). This preliminary label is further verified with ground data, VHRI, and numerous other data (see section 2.3.1 to 2.3.5). The process is iterated by writing an automated script, leading to identification and labelling of all 200 classes from the 8 AEZs. The accuracies of the RCL2014 products were based on validation dataset described at section 2.2.

 
Figure 4. Ideal spectral signatures of the distinctly separable, unique four irrigated (top) and four rainfed (bottom) classes in agro-ecological zone 3 (AEZ 3), Africa. Illustration on the every 16-day time-series of MODIS 250 m NDVI profiles based on ground data sample knowledge base collected throughout Africa for the year 2014. Note: the thickness of the curves indicates the standard deviation of the class, followed by ~99% of the pixels of the class with ~1% of the pixels providing noisy signatures going outside this trend and were removed. 



 
Figure 5.  Quantitative Spectral matching (QSM) of a generic class with an ideal spectral signatures. 
3.4 Rules construction of decision-tree
The proposed method uses RCL2014 for developing recursive decision-tree automated cropland mapping algorithm (ACMA), since it consists in the best possible cropland information available for each AEZ of Africa. The construction of decision-tree ACMA algorithm is a procedure that recursively partitions a dataset into smaller subdivisions on the basis of a set of tests defined at each branch or node in the tree. The tree is composed of a root node (formed from training data), a set of internal nodes (splits), and a set of terminal nodes (leaves). A zonal tree rules are constructed by recursively partitioning the spectral distribution of the training dataset using WEKA (Sharma, 2014) and then expert-timed till the derived ACMA generated cropland layer for the year 2014 (ACL2014) accurately matches with RCL2014. In zones where land cover features were misclassified and classification output was considered unsatisfactory, we added training data, redeveloped the decision tree models, and reapplied models.

We used decision tree approach to hierarchically classify crop types. The decision tree for each AEZ consisted of three steps: a) separately using irrigated/rainfed masks, b) fallow cropland identification, c) decision-tree for the primary classes in the individual AEZs. Fallow croplands were filtered out separately for irrigation and rainfed: for irrigation area, area whose NDVI value lower than 0.2 in six months of one calendar year being mapped as cropland fallows; for rainfed area, pixels whose NDVI falls below a threshold during the peak growing seasons of the crop will be coded as cropland fallows.

An example to distinguish MODIS NDVI spectral distribution of these classes in Africa are shown in Figure 4 for AEZ3. Similar 8 classes were established across all AEZs. Apart from the 8 distinct classes (Figure 4) across AEZs, a cropland fallow class is also coded based on NDVI falling below a threshold during the critical growing period. The 9 classes (Table 2) from the irrigated and rainfed masks of the 8 AEZs are analyzed (e.g., Figure 5) leading to RCL2014. The knowledge captured in the 9 RCL2014 classes are then coded in ACMA (Figure 6) to derive ACMA developed cropland layer for the year 2014 (ACL2014). The process of developing the ACMA go through numerous iterations, as illustrated partially in Figure 6. It involves writing a bunch of simple rules in order to capture RCL2014 knowledge in the codes and replicate it accurately. Every ACMA rule captures certain percentage of total cropland area and its characteristics (e.g., irrigated versus rainfed or intensity) in each of the 9 classes (Table 2) of RCL2014. The process is repeated with numerous additional rules to capture as much cropland area\extent and as many cropland characteristics as possible. If the rule captures non-croplands then the iteration is repeated by tweaking the rule till we are able to precisely (or near precisely) capture croplands, distinguish them from non-croplands, as well as differentiate irrigated croplands from rainfed croplands or cropping intensities. The process requires several runs to slightly adjust and re-adjust the thresholds till ACL2014 achieves as close a match as possible with RCL2014. The ACMA rules are shown in Figure 6. 
Figure 6. Example of ACMA algorithm established for AEZ 3. An illustration of the automated cropland mapping algorithm (ACMA) coded and development for the irrigated and rainfed masks of each of the 8 AEZs. Numerous such codes are written so as to capture the knowledge in RCL2014 accurately and as precisely as possible. The process leads to ACMA generated cropland layer for the year 2014 (RCL2014) replicating ACMA generated cropland layer for the year 2014 (ACL2014). ACMA is then applied for other independent years and validated.

RCL2014 and ACL2014 products are validated in several ways. First, RCL2014 is assessed for accuracy using validation ground data and other data such as VHRI (section 2.2). Second, the ACMA algorithm is validated in several ways. First, a similarity error matrix provides a pixel by pixel comparison between ACL2014 and RCL2014. Further, RCL2014 and ACL2014 country by country cropland area statistics are compared with other sources such as Portman et al., (2014), and FAO et al. (2014).
ACMA is good enough to replicate the reference cropland layer (RCL) when ACMA derived ACL2014 was compared with RCL2014 pixel by pixel for entire Africa (section 4) and a very high degree (85% or above) similarity was achieved. 

3.5 Ensemble and Deployment algorithm on Google Earth Engine for year-to-year-classification
Strength of the ACMA algorithm lays in its ability to reproduce cropland products accurately and automatically for the independent years: past, present, and future. As a result, we used MODIS 250-m time-series data from year 2003 through 2013 and tested the ACMA algorithm. The ACMA generated cropland layers for these years (ACL2003 to ACL2013) should have an overall accuracy of 85% or greater for every year for ACMA to be robust and acceptable. 
3.6 Areal Statistics
Full pixel areas (FPAs) are not actual areas. The actual areas are equivalent to sub-pixel areas (SPAs) and are calculated by multiplying SPAs with cropland area fractions (CAFs). This is because, a MODIS pixel even when cropped may have different proportion of crop within the pixel. Thereby:
SPAs or actual areas = FPAs * CAF
Where CAFs are determined by taking an average MODIS NDVI image during the growing season and plotting all pixels of the class for this period from the MODIS NDVI image in a brightness-greenness-wetness space(Thenkabail et al., 2007b). The same methodology is adopted here. Also, to get actual areas, one need to re-project MODIS cropland products to appropriate projection. Further, areas are established during different seasons by accounting intensity (single, double, triple, or continuous cropping). Areas cropped twice have areas counted two times a year. Single and continuous have areas computed one time a year. In Africa, triple cropping is insignificant, so we ignored it. Detailed methodology for computing SPAs and areas across seasons are presented and discussed by Thenkabail et al. (2007, 2009).
4. Results
We prepared an accurate and contemporary wall-to-wall cropland map depicting continental Africa at 250 m spatial resolution with four cropland products (Figure 7, 8): 1. croplands versus non-croplands, 2. irrigated versus rainfed, 3. cropping intensity, and 4. crop types. Previous land cover datasets were prepared using coarser spatial resolution satellite data ranging from 250 m to 1-km, most of them with only land use/land cover (LULC) information. According to our estimate, during the year 2014, the African continent had 260 million hectares of croplands with an additional 36 Mha of cropland fallows (Figure 7a). Of the 260 Mha 94.4% (248 Mha) was rainfed and 5.6% (14 Mha) irrigated (Figure 7b). About 50% of the rainfed and 60% of the irrigated were single crops (Figure 7c). There is about 24% rainfed continuous crop (e.g., coffee, tea, cocoa; Figure 8d) in Africa. Seasonal distribution of croplands is clearly shown in Figure 8. West Africa is dominated by rainfed cropping during season 1 (Figure 8a) whereas Southern Africa is dominated by rainfed cropping during season 2. Season 2 (117 Mha) has about 25 Mha greater amount of croplands compared to season 1 (93 Mha). Continuous cropping is dominated in the humid forests or derived savannas (Figure 8c). Spatial distribution of the annual cropping of Africa is shown in Figure 8d.
 
Figure 7. RCL2014 Spatial distribution. Reference cropland layers of Africa for the year 2014 (RCL2014). Three RCL2014 products:(a) Cropland versus non-Cropland Layer, (b) Irrigated versus Rainfed Layer, and (c) Crop intensities Layer.
4.1	Reference cropland layer of Africa for the year 2014 (RCL2014)
4.1.1	Croplands versus non-croplands
The accuracies of croplands versus non-croplands were evaluated for each of the 8 agro-ecological zones (AEZs) and the overall accuracies (OAs) varied between 89 to 100% (Table 3).  The accuracy of the resulting cropland products was validated with the global food security support analysis data (GFSAD) project Validation Dataset (croplands.org), which is a consistent global cropland validation dataset designed for validating cropland products and includes multiple datasets that are ground-based, VHRI based, or sourced from other local detailed studies. In this research a total of 3,265 samples, distributed over various agro-ecological zones (AEZs) of Africa, were collected through the crowdsourcing land cover validation tool called cropland.org. Also, the proposed product is compared with cropland statistics derived from other gridded and survey-based data sources. The AEZs 4, 5, 6, 7, and 3, together where about 95% of Africa’s croplands exist, have an accuracy between 89-96%. The very high (98-100%) percent accuracies were for AEZs with very low (0.35 to 4.64%) cropland areas.
 Figure 8. RCL2014 seasonal cropland layers. Reference cropland product of the year 2014 (RCL2014) for Africa at 250m generated using MODIS every 16-day time-series data, extensive field knowledge, image classification, and quantitative spectral matching techniques (QSMTs) methods. The top layer shows the croplands from season 1 and season 2 combined, whereas season 1 croplands are shown in bottom left and season 2 croplands are shown in bottom right.

The overall accuracies of croplands versus non-croplands mapped by the global cropland product of Africa @ 250-m (this study) or GCPA250 when compared with the gridded dataset from other sources, showed that there is an uncertainty between 15-25% (Table 4).
Table 3. RCL2014 overall accuracies for croplands versus non croplands (product 1). Overall accuracies of RCL2014 product 1 (croplands versus non-croplands) based on ground data for Africa in Each AEZs. Overall accuracies (OAs) of the reference cropland layer for the year 2014 (RCL2014) for Africa in each of the 8 agro-ecological zones (AEZs) for croplands versus non-croplands (product 1) produced based on MODIS 250 m every 16 day NDVI data, ground data, and spectral matching techniques.
AEZ	Cropland Area	percent of total Cropland	Non-Cropland Area 	percent of total non-Cropland Area	Crop Samples      	No-Crop Samples	Overall Accuracy1
	Mha	%	Mha	%	(#)	(#)	%
1	1.0	0.3	134.3	4.8	1	49	100
2	13.8	4.6	1,090.0	39.3	2	48	100
3	24.6	8.3	318.2	11.5	36	209	89
4	106.9	35.9	336.6	12.1	29	204	87
5	94.4	31.7	421.8	15.2	20	208	91
6	28.5	9.6	259.2	9.3	13	279	95
7	26.6	9.0	164.6	5.9	6	235	96
8	1.7	0.6	52.2	1.9	7	243	98
Total	296		2,776		114	1378	94
Note: 1= overall accuracy of croplands versus non croplands for the AEZs
Table 4. GCPA250 RCL2014 statistics compared with other products. The percent agreement between the global cropland product of Africa @ 250-m (this study) or GCPA250 when compared with other studies. GlobCover and MODIS MCD12 both have an additional class of mosaic cropland/native vegetation that is added in the (+) comparison and absent in the (−). 
GCPA250 vs. Dataset	GRIPC	GLC30	GLC-SHARE	GlobCover (+)	GlobCover (−)	MCD12 (+)	MCD12 (−)
Crop/Non-Crop Agreement %	87.63	86.88	82.95	73.75	72.79	75.88	72.45
 Kappa Statistic	0.33	0.39	0.48	0.47	0.34	0.46	0.32

Besides, a country by country cropland areas were then computed and compared with MIRCA2000 (Portmann, 2010, Figure 8; Note: The most updated statistics were obtained through personal communication with Portmann and Siebert in 2014 to coincide with our 2014 synthesis). The variability was maximum smaller island nations (e.g., Comoros, Mauritius). Few other countries (e.g., Sierra Leone, Cote dVoire, Chad, Guinea, and Cameroun) also showed significant variability. R-square of 0.53 is calculated based on all 55 African Nations (recognized by the United Nations and African Union) (Figure 9). If we leave these 2 islands and 5 outlier countries (Figure 9), where uncertainty is maximum, the comparisons between: GCPA250 with MIRCA2000 for the rest 48 countries increases to an R-square of 0.78. The GCPA250 These results clearly imply the ability of GCEA250 to compute cropland areas of Africa and provide country level statistics.   

 
Figure 9. GCPA250 versus MIRCA2000 country by country areas. The global cropland product of Africa @ 250-m (this study) or GCPA250 derived country by country cropland areas (rainfed+irrigated) of Africa compared with MIRCA2000 (Portmann, 2010).

4.1.2	Irrigated versus rainfed croplands
Of the 260 Mha of croplands during 2014, 94.42% (248 Mha) was rainfed and just 5.58% (14 Mha) was irrigated (Figure 7b). Africa has 15% of the world population, but just 3.5% of global irrigated area of 400 Mha (Thenkabail et al., 2009, 2012) is in Africa. Overwhelming proportion of the irrigated areas were along the Nile, specifically in Egypt, North Africa, South Africa, along Niger in Mali, and scattered irrigated areas in Southern Africa especially Lake Victoria and Lake Malawi (Figure 7b). Irrigated versus rainfed classification accuracies were evaluated in each of the 8 AEZs and the overall accuracies were between 89 to 94% (Table 5). The accuracy of the irrigated versus rainfed cropland products were validated with the global food security support analysis data (GFSAD) project Validation Dataset (croplands.org) as discussed before. A country by country comparison of the irrigated areas and the rainfed areas computed by this study with MIRCA2000 reported statistics are plotted in Figure 10. The R-square values were 0.89 for irrigated areas and 0.33 for rainfed areas. Irrigated areas can be computed with great certainty. Like croplands (section 4.1.1), uncertainties were greatest for the small island nations and few other countries. If the 7 outlier nations are removed, for the rest 48 countries the R-square values with MIRCA2000 increased to 0.74 for the rainfed areas. As expected, uncertainties were higher for rainfed croplands and this was mainly as a result of highly fragmented, low biomass croplands that were either confused with grasslands in savannas or regrowth vegetation in the humid tropics. It also has to be noted that MIRCA2000 data which relays on the national statistics also has great degree of uncertainty in rainfed cropland estimates.
Table 5. RCL2014 overall accuracies for irrigated versus rainfed (product 2). Overall accuracies of irrigated versus rainfed RCL2014 product 2 (rainfed croplands versus irrigated croplands) based on ground data for Africa in Each AEZs. Overall accuracies (OAs) of the reference cropland layer for the year 2014 (RCL2014) for Africa in each of the 8 agro-ecological zones (AEZs) for irrigated versus rainfed croplands (product 2) produced based on MODIS 250 m every 16 day NDVI data, ground data, and spectral matching techniques.

AEZ	Irrigated Area	Percent of total Irrigated Area	Rainfed Area	Percent of total Rainfed Area	Irrigated samples	Rainfed samples	Total samples	Overall Accuracy*
	Mha	%	Mha	%				%
1	0.8	3.62	1.0	0.35	289	11	300	94
2	4.6	20.16	12.7	4.64	117	164	281	89
3	2.4	10.45	22.7	8.26	18	273	291	91
4	6.8	29.39	98.6	35.92	25	267	292	93
5	6.2	26.75	87.1	31.72	20	272	292	86
6	1.7	7.35	26.3	9.57	11	274	285	91
7	0.5	2.25	24.6	8.95	6	280	286	93
8	0.005	0.03	1.6	0.59	2	283	285	92
Total	23		273		488	1824	2312	91
Note: *= overall accuracy of irrigated versus rainfed crop in crop area of each AEZ


 
Figure 10. GCPA250 for RCL2014 versus MIRCA2000 irrigated and rainfed country by country statistics. The global cropland product of Africa @ 250-m (this study) or GCPA250 reference cropland layer for the year 2014 (RCL2014) irrigation/rainfed country area vs MIRCA2000. (a) Comparison of country-level estimates of cropland area from the new dataset presented in this paper against corresponding data from MIRCA2000 irrigation area. (b) Comparison of country-level estimates of cropland area from the new dataset presented in this paper against corresponding data from MIRCA2000 rainfed area.
4.1.3	Cropping intensity 
In both irrigated and rainfed areas of Africa, single crop is overwhelmingly dominant (Figure 7c). Of the 248 Mha of rainfed areas during 2014, single crop was 41.2%, followed by continuous crop (e.g., plantations like cocoa, coffee) with 24%, double crop with 12.2 %, and rainfed cropland fallows of 10.8. Of the 14 Mha of irrigated areas during 2014, single crop was 59.1%, followed by continuous crop with 19.5%, double crop with 20.6%. Cropland fallows were 36 Mha during 2014, almost all of that in rainfed croplands with a negligible portion in irrigated croplands.
4.1.4	Cropping seasonal Layer
Cropland areas are also mapped for two main seasons, continuous crops and a combination of the two seasons (Figure 8, Table 6). Season 1 (January-May) and season 2 (June-September). Much of the season 1 crops are in Southern Africa and North Africa, while season 2 is mainly distributed in West and Central Africa. Irrigated crops and continuous plantation crops are seen in both seasons, while continuous crops concentrated in West and Central Africa. Overall, for entire Africa, net cropland areas (NCAs) for season 1 was 95.59 Mha (Figure 8a, Table 6) and for season 2 was 117.4 Mha (Figure 8b, Table 6). 
4.2 Error matrix comparing ACP2014 with RCL2014
Automated cropland classification algorithm (ACMA) algorithm was applied on MODIS 250m time-series mega file data cube for the year 2014 (MFDC2014) to obtain an ACMA derived cropland product for the year 2014 (ACL2014) which was then compared with RCL2014, pixel by pixel for entire Africa involving over little over 17.2 million of MODIS 250m pixels in a similarity matrix (Table 7). The similarity between ACL2014 and RCL2014 was over 90% for every class with overall accuracy of 96% (kappa 0.72). Thus, the ability of ACMA to replicate the 9 classes in RCL2014 with high level of accuracies was clearly established (Table 7).


 

Table 6. RCL2014 cropland area seasonal and total statistics of Africa for the year 2014 using MODIS 250m time-series. The year 2014 cropland area statistics of Africa for the 8 cropland classes and the cropland fallow class. Sub-pixel areas (SPAs) or actual areas were computed for the season 1 (January-May), season 2 (June-September), and for the continuous cropping. Net cropland areas of each season were summed to obtain gross cropland areas from both seasons and for continuous plantation crops.
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
#	Class	Net Crop Area Season 1	Net Crop Area  Season 2	Net Crop Area Continuous	Annualized Cropland Area
		FPA	CAF	SPA	FPA	CAF	SPA	FPA	CAF	SPA	Season1+Season2+Continous
		Mha	(-)	Mha	Mha	(-)	Mha	Mha	(-)	Mha	Mha
1	Irrigated, SC, season 2*	 	 	 	5.09	0.95	4.84	 	 	 	4.84
2	Irrigated, SC, season 1*	5.12	0.90	4.61	 	 	 	 	 	 	4.61
3	Irrigated, DC,	13.06	0.92	12.02	13.06	0.93	12.15	 	 	 	24.17
4	Irrigated, Continuous	 	 	 	 	 	 	3.37	0.91	3.07	3.07
5	Rainfed, SC, season 2	 	 	 	93.31	0.85	79.32	 	 	 	79.32
6	Rainfed, SC, season 1	73.82	0.78	57.58	 	 	 	 	 	 	57.58
7	Rainfed, DC,	25.51	0.76	19.39	25.51	0.83	21.17	 	 	 	40.56
8	Rainfed, Continuous	 	 	 	 	 	 	89.70	0.89	79.83	79.83
9	Rainfed, Fallow-lands	36.00	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Total Net Crop Area (without Fallow)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	260.64
Total Net Crop Area (with Fallow)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	296.64
Total Gross Crop Area (with Fallow)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	329.96
Note:
FPA (Full-Pixel Area) is determined by aggregation of reprojected MODIS Pixels
CAF (Crop area Fraction) is determined by developing relationship between NDVI of growing season with percent cover
SPA (Sub-pixel area) is FPA multiplied by CAF


 

Table 7. ACL2014 versus RCL2014 similarity/error matrix. Similarity matrix between ACMA generated cropland product for the year 2014 (ACL2014) with reference cropland layer (RCL2014)
 	RCL2014
 	Class	1. Irrigated, SC, season2	2. Irrigated, SC, season1	3. Irrigated, DC	4. Irrigated, Continuous	5. Rainfed, SC, season2	6. Rainfed, SC, season1	7. Rainfed, DC	8. Rainfed, Continuous	9. Fallow-lands	User Accuracy
ACL2014	1. Irrigated, SC, season2	813282	21517	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	97.4%
	2. Irrigated, SC, season1	25992	772998	10400	0	0	0	0	0	0	95.5%
	3. Irrigated, DC	0	9455	548804	13908	0	0	0	0	0	95.9%
	4. Irrigated, Continuous	0	0	11122	514613	0	0	0	0	0	97.9%
	5. Rainfed, SC, season2	0	0	0	0	14207104	501841	0	0	0	96.6%
	6. Rainfed, SC, season1	0	0	0	0	731	12564794	511298	0	0	96.1%
	7. Rainfed, DC, 	0	0	0	0	0	145763	4570981	581352	0	86.3%
	8. Rainfed, Continuous	0	0	0	0	0	0	166553	11270691	208927	96.8%
	9. Fallow-lands	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	166553	16994878	99.0%
	Total	839274	803970	570326	528521	14207835	13212398	5248832	12018596	17203805	 
	Producer Accuracy	96.9%	96.1%	96.2%	97.4%	100.0%	95.1%	87.1%	93.8%	98.79%	 
 	Overall Similarity	0.96	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	Kappa	0.72

 
4.3 ACMA derived annual cropland layers from 2003-2014
We applied ACMA algorithm for 11 independent years (2003 through 2014) using MODIS 250 m every 16-day time-series data of these years available on Google Earth Engine.  The results as depicted in Figure 11 showed that the: a) net cropland areas (NCAs) of Africa increased by about 10 Mha from 2003 to 2014, going from 250 Mha to 270 Mha; b) gross cropland areas (GCAs) Africa also increase by about 10 Mha from 2003 to 2014, going from 310 Mha to 325 Mha; c) cropland fallows of Africa decreased by about 10 Mha from 2003 to 2014, going from 43 Mha to 30 Mha. From 2003 to 2014 there was10 Mha in cropland area increase and another 10 Mha of cropland fallow decrease. This is, roughly an increase of 1 Mha of croplands per year, whereas there was a decrease of 1 Mha of cropland fallows per year during the same period.  This can only increase further with rapid increase in population and increasing food and nutritional demands of the populations. The ability of ACMA algorithm to compute croplands as well as cropland fallows is important one. In drought year cropland fallows increase and cropland areas decrease. 
 
Figure 11. ACL2003 to ACL2014 derived cropland areas versus cropland fallow areas.

The ability of ACMA to capture variability are depicted between precipitation, ndvi and cropland areas. With respect to changes in precipitation. During drought years, we see dramatic: 1. increase in cropland fallows, and 2. decrease in cropland areas. Also during drought years, there is significant decrease in the vigor of the existing croplands as illustrated by MODIS 250-m time-series NDVI plots. For example, in the 40,337 hectares’ portion of area for AEZ3 depicted in Figure 13, 57% was cropland fallows during the drought year of 2005, whereas during normal year of 2008 there was 35% fallow and during the good year of 2006 there was only 4% fallows. Similarly, in 0.62 Mha portion of cropland area in AEZ5 depicted in Figure 12, 21% was cropland fallows during the drought year of 2005, whereas during normal year of 2008 there was 12% fallow and during the good year of 2006 there was only 10% fallows. The NDVI vigor trends also clearly depict drought, normal, and good years. Thereby, the ability of ACMA to highlight combination of the above three factors, clearly highlights its value in assessing food security.

 
Figure 12. ACMA derived croplands versus cropland fallows for a drought year (2005), normal year (2008), and wet year (2006) in AEZ3. The figure shows spatial distribution of croplands versus cropland fallows (left), mean MODIS 250-m NDVI during the three year (top right) and precipitation (bottom right).

 
 
Figure 13. ACMA derived croplands versus cropland fallows for a drought year (2005), normal year (2008), and wet year (2006) in AEZ5. The figure shows spatial distribution of croplands versus cropland fallows (left), mean MODIS 250-m NDVI during the three year (top right) and precipitation (bottom right).
5. Discussion
Efficient annual cropland mapping approaches for operational cropland characterization, mapping, and monitoring must comply with several requirements such as reliability, accuracy, automation and effectiveness. This study demonstrated the ability of the recursive automated cropland mapping algorithm (ACMA) rules to accurately capture the available cropland information over large areas. The process involves the concept of using the knowledge base in the reference cropland layer (RCL) to train and build ACMA algorithm and replicate the RCL accurately and routinely within and across years. Testing and validation of ACMA requires us to capture accurate knowledge base from multiple sources (ground samples, photo-interpret, and expert-knowledge).  Since the uncertainty of this method depends on the quality and quantity of the reference cropland layer as primary input, we designed a robust open framework and web-based support system (croplands.org) in order to support, create, and update this reference cropland layer easily. In this research we trained recursive decision tree ACMA algorithm to achieve very high levels of accuracies (>90%) for 4 irrigated, 4 rainfed, and 1 fallow classes. Larger, and higher quality reference data would facilitate development of accurate automated cropland classification algorithms (ACMA). Here, reference cropland layer (RCL) was used to understand, map, and model: 1) knowledge captured from different sources; 2) recursive temporal rules for every pixel; 2) the strengths of the generalized rules.
To achieve greater accuracies, development of ACMA need to be done considering: (a) cropland masks, (b) AEZs, and (c) richness (quality, quantity, and spatial spread) of the reference data. The AEZs help us focus on certain agro-climatic zones and capture their unique characteristics. Along with the AEZ approach, the 250-m Crop mask derived from multiple sources is an important starting point for this study to make significant advance from previous studies. This allowed us to conduct this research by focusing heavily within the cropland mask, where majority (>95%) of the present croplands of Africa exists. Nevertheless, it is important to check any expansion of croplands beyond the existing cropland mask. This requires us to: 1) carefully choose the way to stratify the input MODIS data; 2) Collect reference data using crowdsourcing technique and interpret them with correctly. Until we can establish the effective knowledge-based decision-tree and verify the classification output with acceptable accuracies, it is not prudent to apply recursive decision tree ACMA algorithm across the continent with equal certainty. That is all the more reason to approach the ACMA development using AEZs. 

The biggest difficulty in ACMA development and testing is in gathering sufficient training and validation samples to support reliable ACMA coding, rapid product delivery, and accurate product development over such large areas as African continent. A certain class in a particular AEZ may have the lowest producer’s and user’s accuracies not because of the uncertainty in the classification algorithms but as a result of the poor or biased training and validation datasets. Another challenge in up-scaling the local cropland mapping to the continental or global scales through knowledge capture from a zonal decision-tree. Yet another challenge was to accurately map fallow cropland because of: 1. too few cropland fallow samples, 2. complexity of fallows in defining them, and 3. classification error between cropland fallows and low-density non-cropland vegetation. This might be controlled by better describing the temporal behavior of cropland fallows and updating cropland mask when necessary.  

The goal was not to map to many classes where achieving high accuracies becomes complicated, but replicating them year after year (section 4.3) accurately becomes extremely difficult over very large areas. However, mapping a known number of classes accurately and with ability to replicate year after year also accurately is crucial and meets the important challenge of gathering routine and repetitive cropland statistics over time and space, thus contributing to food security (Figure 9, 10, 11 and section 4.3). Often the knowledge of the zonal decision-trees that comes from the reference data sourced from ground samples, photo-interpretation, and expert-knowledge for that zone enriches the recursive ACMA rules for that zone and extrapolation of the same to other zones may not be applicable. 

The MODIS 250-m resolution is suitable for national and sub-national applications for the continental level cropland mapping and for deriving cropland statistics at the country and sub-national level. The ability of ACMA to use MODIS time-series data and provide accurate annual updated cropland products is of great interest to the global change science community that benefits from these dynamics because it provides: (a) spatial information content specialized for agriculture; (b) globally consistent and locally relevant information. 

The use of GEE in data collection to identify reference samples in areas where ground data is lacking does present some new challenges. Sampling and selecting of a homogenous pixel at MODIS scale is not easy sometimes, especially working in Africa. This issue can only be controlled through cleaning the input samples with more ancillary data layers where available and remove the outliner as much as possible. Using Google Earth Engine for identifying reference samples to is also debated because they are just interpreted results, not as valuable as the data collected from the field. However, previous research supports the idea that simple, rapid approaches to land cover mapping have benefits. See et al. (2013b) found that crowdsourced data from Google Earth delineating the spatial distribution of cropland in Ethiopia had a higher overall accuracy than global land cover datasets. When analyzing the crowdsourced data itself, See et al. (2013a) found that users underestimate the degree of human impact and there was little difference between experts and non-experts in identifying human impacts. To serve the requirement of resource managers as well as that of the global change research community better, The product and algorithm are publicly available at: https://croplands.org/ and http://geography.wr.usgs.gov/science/croplands/algorithms/africa_250m.html.
6. Conclusions
We developed and implemented a rule-based recursive automated cropland mapping algorithm (ACMA) using MODIS 250-m 16-day interval time-series data. First, a reference cropland layer for the year 2014 (RCL2014) was produced for the entire African continent with cropland products consisting of: 1. Cropland extent and areas, 2. Irrigated versus rainfed croplands, 3. Cropping intensities, 4. Croplands versus cropland fallows, and 5. Crop type and\or dominance. Second, a web-based in-situ reference dataset repository (croplands.org) was developed to help to collect ground data from the team and partners through field visits as well as community through crowdsourcing. Third, a ACMA algorithm was developed using RCL2014 knowledge-base. Fourth, an ACMA algorithm derived cropland layer for the year 2014 (ACL2014) was produced using ACMA algorithm and compared with RCL2014. The pixel by pixel error matrix comparison involved little over 17.2 million pixels between ACL2014 and RCL2014 of the entire African continent provided producer’s, user’s, and overall accuracies of over 90%. This demonstrated the ability of ACMA to accurately produce ACL products by capturing knowledge-base in RCL and by replicating it. The derived cropland products were evaluated using ground validation samples for each of the 8 agro-ecological zones (AEZs) and the overall accuracies (OAs) were greater than 89%. 

A country-by-country cropland areas statistics of all 55 African Countries generated from this study was compared with the national census data based MIRCA2000 which were also updated in the year 2014. The relationships showed significant correlations with R-square values between 0.72 to 0.89 for 48 of 55 countries, with uncertainties only for 2 small island nations and 5 other nations where national statistics had great degree of uncertainties. A pixel-based agreement between the global cropland product of Africa @ 250-m (GCPA250) produced in this study were compared with a number of other studies which showed uncertainties varying between 15 to 25%. 

Finally, ACMA algorithm was deployed on the Google Earth Engine cloud computing platform (with executable GEE codes shared at GitHub: https://github.com/suredream/ACM2016), and applied on MODIS data from years 2003 through 2014, to produce annual ACMA generated cropland layers for these years (ACL2003 through ACL2014). The results showed that over 12 years in the African continent there was, on an average, about: (a) 1 million hectares\year increase in croplands areas, and (b) 1 million hectares\year decrease in cropland fallow areas.  The ACMA algorithm clearly demonstrated the ability to accurately capture variations in: A. cropland areas, B. cropland fallow areas, and C. cropland vigor, during drought, normal, and above-normal years routinely and repeatedly year after year over large areas such as for the large continent of Africa. Such ability of the ACMA algorithm clearly provides the needed cropland products for assessing food security. To serve the requirement of resource managers as well as that of the global change research community better, the product and algorithm are made publicly available at: https://croplands.org/   and http://geography.wr.usgs.gov/science/croplands/algorithms/africa_250m.html
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank following persons for their support: Dr. Felix T. Portman and Dr. Stefan Siebert for providing statistics of MIRCA2000 (Portmann, 2010; also latest statistics through personal communication between Dr. Stefan Siebert and Prasad S. Thenkabail); Dr. Peng Gong for sharing of FROMGLC Validation Dataset (Zhao et al., 2014); Dr. Ryutaro Tateishi for sharing of CEReS Gaia validation data (Tateishi et al., 2014), and Dr. Friedl Mark for sharing GRIPC500 dataset for inter-comparison. Special thanks to Dr. Fabio Grita and Dr. Michela Marinelli’s help of FAO/CountrySTAT team. This study was supported by the NASA MEaSUREs (Making Earth System Data Records for Use in Research Environments). The project is funded by NASA MEaSUREs, through NASA ROSES solicitation, and funded for a period of 5 years (June 1, 2013- May 31, 2018). The NASA MEaSUREs project grant number:  NNH13AV82I and the USGS Sales Order number is 29039. We gratefully acknowledge this support. The United States Geological Survey (USGS) provided supplemental funding as well as numerous other direct and indirect support through its Land Change Science (LCS), and Land Remote Sensing (LRS) programs, as well as support from USGS Climate and Land Use Change Mission Area. 


References:
Arino, O., Gross, D., Ranera, F., Leroy, M., Bicheron, P., Brockman, C., Defourny, P., Vancutsem, C., Achard, F., Durieux, L., Bourg, L., Latham, J., Di Gregorio, A., Witt, R., Herold, M., Sambale, J., Plummer, S., Weber, J.-L., 2005. GlobCover: ESA service for global land cover from MERIS, in: 2007 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. IEEE,IEEE, pp. 2412–2415. doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2007.4423328
Begue, A., Vintrou, E., Saad, A., Hiernaux, P., 2014. Differences between cropland and rangeland MODIS phenology (start-of-season) in Mali. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 31. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2014.03.024
Biradar, C.M., Thenkabail, P.S., Noojipady, P., Li, Y., Dheeravath, V., Turral, H., Velpuri, M., Gumma, M.K., Gangalakunta, O.R.P., Cai, X.L., Xiao, X., Schull, M.A., Alankara, R.D., Gunasinghe, S., Mohideen, S., 2009. A global map of rainfed cropland areas (GMRCA) at the end of last millennium using remote sensing. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 11. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2008.11.002
Chamberlin, J., Jayne, T.., Headey, D., 2014. Scarcity amidst abundance? Reassessing the potential for cropland expansion in Africa. Food Policy 48. doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2014.05.002
Chen, J., Chen, J., Liao, A., Cao, X., Chen, L., Chen, X., He, C., Han, G., Peng, S., Lu, M., Zhang, W., Tong, X., Mills, J., 2015. Global land cover mapping at 30m resolution: A POK-based operational approach. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 103. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.09.002
Clover, J., 2003. Food Security in Sub-Sharan Africa. African Security Review 12, 5–15. doi:10.1080/10246029.2003.9627566
Congalton, R., Gu, J., Yadav, K., Thenkabail, P., Ozdogan, M., 2014. Global Land Cover Mapping: A Review and Uncertainty Analysis. Remote Sensing 6. doi:10.3390/rs61212070
Conrad, C., Lamers, J.P.A., Ibragimov, N., Löw, F., Martius, C., 2016. Analysing irrigated crop rotation patterns in arid Uzbekistan by the means of remote sensing: A case study on post-Soviet agricultural land use. Journal of Arid Environments 124. doi:10.1016/j.jaridenv.2015.08.008
DeFries, R., 2000. Multiple Criteria for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms for Land Cover Classification from Satellite Data. Remote Sensing of Environment 74. doi:10.1016/S0034-4257(00)00142-5
Deng, C., Wu, C., 2013. The use of single-date MODIS imagery for estimating large-scale urban impervious surface fraction with spectral mixture analysis and machine learning techniques. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 86. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2013.09.010
Dheeravath, V., Thenkabail, P.S., Chandrakantha, G., Noojipady, P., Reddy, G.P.O., Biradar, C.M., Gumma, M.K., Velpuri, M., 2009. Irrigated areas of India derived using MODIS 500 m time series for the years 2001–2003. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 42–59. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2009.08.004
Ding, Y., Zhao, K., Zheng, X., Jiang, T., 2014. Temporal dynamics of spatial heterogeneity over cropland quantified by time-series NDVI, near infrared and red reflectance of Landsat 8 OLI imagery. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 30. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2014.01.009
Dong, J., Xiao, X., Kou, W., Qin, Y., Zhang, G., Li, L., Jin, C., Zhou, Y., Wang, J., Biradar, C., Liu, J., Moore, B., 2015. Tracking the dynamics of paddy rice planting area in 1986–2010 through time series Landsat images and phenology-based algorithms. Remote Sensing of Environment 160. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2015.01.004
Duro, D.C., Franklin, S.E., Dubé, M.G., 2012. A comparison of pixel-based and object-based image analysis with selected machine learning algorithms for the classification of agricultural landscapes using SPOT-5 HRG imagery. Remote Sensing of Environment 118. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2011.11.020
Egorov, A.V., Hansen, M.C., Roy, D.P., Kommareddy, A., Potapov, P.V., 2015. Image interpretation-guided supervised classification using nested segmentation. Remote Sensing of Environment 165. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2015.04.022
Esch, T., Metz, A., Marconcini, M., Keil, M., 2014. Combined use of multi-seasonal high and medium resolution satellite imagery for parcel-related mapping of cropland and grassland. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 28. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2013.12.007
Foody, G.M., 2010. Assessing the accuracy of land cover change with imperfect ground reference data. Remote Sensing of Environment 114. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2010.05.003
Friedl, M.A., Brodley, C.E., 1997. Decision tree classification of land cover from remotely sensed data. Remote Sensing of Environment 61. doi:10.1016/S0034-4257(97)00049-7
Friedl, M.., McIver, D.., Hodges, J.C.., Zhang, X.., Muchoney, D., Strahler, A.., Woodcock, C.., Gopal, S., Schneider, A., Cooper, A., Baccini, A., Gao, F., Schaaf, C., 2002. Global land cover mapping from MODIS: algorithms and early results. Remote Sensing of Environment 83. doi:10.1016/S0034-4257(02)00078-0
Fritz, S., McCallum, I., Schill, C., Perger, C., Grillmayer, R., Achard, F., Kraxner, F., Obersteiner, M., 2009. Geo-Wiki.Org: The Use of Crowdsourcing to Improve Global Land Cover. Remote Sensing 1. doi:10.3390/rs1030345
Fritz, S., See, L., 2008. Identifying and quantifying uncertainty and spatial disagreement in the comparison of Global Land Cover for different applications. Global Change Biology 14. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2007.01519.x
Fritz, S., See, L., McCallum, I., Schill, C., Obersteiner, M., van der Velde, M., Boettcher, H., Havlík, P., Achard, F., 2011a. Highlighting continued uncertainty in global land cover maps for the user community. Environmental Research Letters 6. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/6/4/044005
Fritz, S., You, L., Bun, A., See, L., McCallum, I., Schill, C., Perger, C., Liu, J., Hansen, M., Obersteiner, M., 2011b. Cropland for sub-Saharan Africa: A synergistic approach using five land cover data sets: A NEW CALIBRATED CROPLAND DATA SET. Geophysical Research Letters 38. doi:10.1029/2010GL046213
Gerland, P., Raftery, A.E., Sevčíková, H., Li, N., Gu, D., Spoorenberg, T., Alkema, L., Fosdick, B.K., Chunn, J., Lalic, N., Bay, G., Buettner, T., Heilig, G.K., Wilmoth, J., 2014. World population stabilization unlikely this century. Science (New York, N.Y.) 346, 234–237. doi:10.1126/science.1257469
Giri, C., Zhu, Z., Reed, B., 2002. A comparative analysis of the Global Land Cover 2000 and MODIS land cover data sets. Remote Sensing of Environment 123–132. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2004.09.005
Gumma, M.K., Thenkabail, P.S., Maunahan, A., Islam, S., Nelson, A., 2014. Mapping seasonal rice cropland extent and area in the high cropping intensity environment of Bangladesh using MODIS 500m data for the year 2010. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 91. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.02.007
Haack, B., Mahabir, R., Kerkering, J., 2015. Remote sensing-derived national land cover land use maps: a comparison for Malawi. Geocarto International 30, 270–292. doi:10.1080/10106049.2014.952355
Hansen, M.C., Potapov, P.V., Moore, R., Hancher, M., Turubanova, S.A., Tyukavina, A., Thau, D., Stehman, S.V., Goetz, S.J., Loveland, T.R., Kommareddy, A., Egorov, A., Chini, L., Justice, C.O., Townshend, J.R.G., 2013. High-Resolution Global Maps of 21st-Century Forest Cover Change. Science 342, 850–853.
Hansen, M.C., Reed, B., 2000. A comparison of the IGBP DISCover and University of Maryland 1 km global land cover products. International Journal of Remote Sensing 21, 1365–1373. doi:10.1080/014311600210218
Helmholz, P., Rottensteiner, F., Heipke, C., 2014. Semi-automatic verification of cropland and grassland using very high resolution mono-temporal satellite images. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 97. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.09.008
Hentze, K., Thonfeld, F., Menz, G., 2016. Evaluating Crop Area Mapping from MODIS Time-Series as an Assessment Tool for Zimbabwe’s “Fast Track Land Reform Programme”. PloS one 11. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0156630
Herold, M., Mayaux, P., Woodcock, C.., Baccini, A., Schmullius, C., 2008. Some challenges in global land cover mapping: An assessment of agreement and accuracy in existing 1 km datasets. Remote Sensing of Environment 112. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2007.11.013
Jamali, S., Seaquist, J., Eklundh, L., Ardö, J., 2014. Automated mapping of vegetation trends with polynomials using NDVI imagery over the Sahel. Remote Sensing of Environment 141. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2013.10.019
Jayne, T.., Chamberlin, J., Headey, D.D., 2014. Land pressures, the evolution of farming systems, and development strategies in Africa: A synthesis. Food Policy 48. doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2014.05.014
Jeganathan, C., Dash, J., Atkinson, P.M., 2014. Remotely sensed trends in the phenology of northern high latitude terrestrial vegetation, controlling for land cover change and vegetation type. Remote Sensing of Environment 143. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2013.11.020
Kidane, Y., Stahlmann, R., Beierkuhnlein, C., 2012. Vegetation dynamics, and land use and land cover change in the Bale Mountains, Ethiopia. Environmental monitoring and assessment 184, 7473–7489. doi:10.1007/s10661-011-2514-8
Lary, D.J., Alavi, A.H., Gandomi, A.H., Walker, A.L., 2015. Machine learning in geosciences and remote sensing. Geoscience Frontiers. doi:10.1016/j.gsf.2015.07.003
Leroux, L., Jolivot, A., Bégué, A., Seen, D., Zoungrana, B., 2014. How Reliable is the MODIS Land Cover Product for Crop Mapping Sub-Saharan Agricultural Landscapes? Remote Sensing 6. doi:10.3390/rs6098541
Lobell, D.B., Asner, G.P., 2002. Cropland distributions from temporal unmixing of MODIS data. Remote Sensing of Environment 412–422. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2004.08.002
Lobell, D.B., Burke, M.B., Tebaldi, C., Mastrandrea, M.D., Falcon, W.P., Naylor, R.L., 2008. Prioritizing climate change adaptation needs for food security in 2030. Science (New York, N.Y.) 319, 607–610. doi:10.1126/science.1152339
Mayaux, P., Bartholomé, E., Fritz, S., Belward, A., 2004. A new land-cover map of Africa for the year 2000: New land-cover map of Africa. Journal of Biogeography 31. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2699.2004.01073.x
Mayaux, P., Belward, A.., Latham, J., Schmullius, C.. with Herold, M., Woodcock, C.., Antonio di Gregorio, 2006. A joint initiative for harmonization and validation of land cover datasets. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 44. doi:10.1109/TGRS.2006.871219
McCallum, I., Obersteiner, M., Nilsson, S., Shvidenko, A., 2004. A spatial comparison of four satellite derived 1km global land cover datasets. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 246–255. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2005.12.002
Mountrakis, G., Im, J., Ogole, C., 2010. Support vector machines in remote sensing: A review. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 247–259. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2010.11.001
Müller, H., Rufin, P., Griffiths, P., Barros Siqueira, A.J., Hostert, P., 2015. Mining dense Landsat time series for separating cropland and pasture in a heterogeneous Brazilian savanna landscape. Remote Sensing of Environment 156. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2014.10.014
Nemani, R., Votava, P., Michaelis, A., Melton, F., Milesi, C., 2011. Collaborative Supercomputing for Global Change Science. Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union 92. doi:10.1029/2011EO130001
Ozdogan, M., Gutman, G., 2008. A new methodology to map irrigated areas using multi-temporal MODIS and ancillary data: An application example in the continental US. Remote Sensing of Environment 112, 3520–3537. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2008.04.010
Pantazi, X.E., Moshou, D., Alexandridis, T., Whetton, R.L., Mouazen, A.M., 2016. Wheat yield prediction using machine learning and advanced sensing techniques. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 121. doi:10.1016/j.compag.2015.11.018
Pan, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, Q., Wang, L., Cheng, Y., Zhang, H., Blackburn, G.A., Yan, J., Liu, J., 2015. Mapping crop phenology using NDVI time-series derived from HJ-1 A/B data. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 34. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2014.08.011
Peña-Arancibia, J.L., Mainuddin, M., Kirby, J.M., Chiew, F.H.S., McVicar, T.R., Vaze, J., 2016. Assessing irrigated agriculture’s surface water and groundwater consumption by combining satellite remote sensing and hydrologic modelling. The Science of the total environment 542, 372–382. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.10.086
Peña-Arancibia, J.L., McVicar, T.R., Paydar, Z., Li, L., Guerschman, J.P., Donohue, R.J., Dutta, D., Podger, G.M., van Dijk, A.I.J.M., Chiew, F.H.S., 2014. Dynamic identification of summer cropping irrigated areas in a large basin experiencing extreme climatic variability. Remote Sensing of Environment 154. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2014.08.016
Pittman, K., Hansen, M.C., Becker-Reshef, I., Potapov, P.V., Justice, C.O., 2010. Estimating Global Cropland Extent with Multi-year MODIS Data. Remote Sensing 2. doi:10.3390/rs2071844
Qiu, B., Zhong, M., Tang, Z., Wang, C., 2014. A new methodology to map double-cropping croplands based on continuous wavelet transform. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 26. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2013.05.016
Radoux, J., Lamarche, C., Van Bogaert, E., Bontemps, S., Brockmann, C., Defourny, P., 2014. Automated Training Sample Extraction for Global Land Cover Mapping. Remote Sensing 6. doi:10.3390/rs6053965
Rembold, F., Carnicelli, S., Nori, M., Ferrari, G.A., 2000. Use of aerial photographs, Landsat TM imagery and multidisciplinary field survey for land-cover change analysis in the lakes region (Ethiopia). International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 2. doi:10.1016/S0303-2434(00)85012-6
Salmon, J.M., Friedl, M.A., Frolking, S., Wisser, D., Douglas, E.M., 2015. Global rain-fed, irrigated, and paddy croplands: A new high resolution map derived from remote sensing, crop inventories and climate data. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 38. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2015.01.014
Shalaby, A., Tateishi, R., 2007. Remote sensing and GIS for mapping and monitoring land cover and land-use changes in the Northwestern coastal zone of Egypt. Applied Geography 27. doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2006.09.004
Shao, Y., Lunetta, R.S., 2012. Comparison of support vector machine, neural network, and CART algorithms for the land-cover classification using limited training data points. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 70. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2012.04.001
Sharma, P., 2014. Comparative Analysis of Various Decision Tree Classification Algorithms using WEKA. International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in Computing and Communication 3. doi:10.17762/ijritcc2321-8169.150254
Tateishi, R., Hoan, N.T., Kobayashi, T., Alsaaideh, B., Tana, G., Phong, D.X., 2014. Production of Global Land Cover Data – GLCNMO2008. Journal of Geography and Geology 6. doi:10.5539/jgg.v6n3p99
Tatsumi, K., Yamashiki, Y., Canales Torres, M.A., Taipe, C.L.R., 2015. Crop classification of upland fields using Random forest of time-series Landsat 7 ETM+ data. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 115. doi:10.1016/j.compag.2015.05.001
Thenkabail, P.S., Wu, Z., 2012. An Automated Cropland Classification Algorithm (ACCA) for Tajikistan by Combining Landsat, MODIS, and Secondary Data. Remote Sensing 4. doi:10.3390/rs4102890
Thomson, K.J., 2011. Rising Global Interest in Farmland: Can It Yield Sustainable and Equitable Benefits? By K. Deininger and D. Byerlee with J. Lindsay, A. Norton, H. Selod and M. Stickler. Washington D.C.: The World Bank (2011), pp. 214, £25.00. ISBN 978-0-8213-8591-3.--- Either ISSN or Journal title must be supplied. Experimental Agriculture 47. doi:10.1017/S0014479711000548
Tsendbazar, N.., de Bruin, S., Herold, M., 2014. Assessing global land cover reference datasets for different user communities. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.02.008
Vancutsem, C., Marinho, E., Kayitakire, F., See, L., Fritz, S., 2012. Harmonizing and Combining Existing Land Cover/Land Use Datasets for Cropland Area Monitoring at the African Continental Scale. Remote Sensing 5. doi:10.3390/rs5010019
Vintrou, E., Desbrosse, A., Bégué, A., Traoré, S., Baron, C., Lo Seen, D., 2012. Crop area mapping in West Africa using landscape stratification of MODIS time series and comparison with existing global land products. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 14. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2011.06.010
Waldner, F., Canto, G.S., Defourny, P., 2015. Automated annual cropland mapping using knowledge-based temporal features. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 110. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2015.09.013
Wang, J., Zhao, Y., Li, C., Yu, L., Liu, D., Gong, P., 2015. Mapping global land cover in 2001 and 2010 with spatial-temporal consistency at 250m resolution. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 103. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.03.007
Wardlow, B., Egbert, S., Kastens, J., 2005. Analysis of time-series MODIS 250 m vegetation index data for crop classification in the U.S. Central Great Plains. Remote Sensing of Environment 290–310. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2006.11.021
Were, K.., Dick, Ø.., Singh, B.., 2013. Remotely sensing the spatial and temporal land cover changes in Eastern Mau forest reserve and Lake Nakuru drainage basin, Kenya. Applied Geography 41. doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.03.017
Wu, Z., Thenkabail, P.S., Verdin, J.P., 2014. Automated Cropland Classification Algorithm (ACCA) for California Using Multi-sensor Remote Sensing. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 80. doi:10.14358/PERS.80.1.81
Yan, L., Roy, D.P., 2014. Automated crop field extraction from multi-temporal Web Enabled Landsat Data. Remote Sensing of Environment 144. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2014.01.006
Zhang, G., Xiao, X., Dong, J., Kou, W., Jin, C., Qin, Y., Zhou, Y., Wang, J., Menarguez, M.A., Biradar, C., 2015. Mapping paddy rice planting areas through time series analysis of MODIS land surface temperature and vegetation index data. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 106. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2015.05.011
Zhang, J., Wu, G., Hu, X., Li, S., Hao, S., 2011. A Parallel K-Means Clustering Algorithm with MPI, in: 2011 Fourth International Symposium on Parallel Architectures, Algorithms and Programming. IEEE,IEEE, pp. 60–64. doi:10.1109/PAAP.2011.17
Zhao, Y., Gong, P., Yu, L., Hu, L., Li, X., Li, C., Zhang, H., Zheng, Y., Wang, J., Zhao, Y., Cheng, Q., Liu, C., Liu, S., Wang, X., 2014. Towards a common validation sample set for global land-cover mapping. International Journal of Remote Sensing 35, 4795–4814. doi:10.1080/01431161.2014.930202
Zhong, L., Gong, P., Biging, G.S., 2014. Efficient corn and soybean mapping with temporal extendability: A multi-year experiment using Landsat imagery. Remote Sensing of Environment 140. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2013.08.023
Zhou, Y., Xiao, X., Qin, Y., Dong, J., Zhang, G., Kou, W., Jin, C., Wang, J., Li, X., 2016. Mapping paddy rice planting area in rice-wetland coexistent areas through analysis of Landsat 8 OLI and MODIS images. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 46. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2015.11.001
Zucca, C., Wu, W., Dessena, L., Mulas, M., 2015. Assessing the Effectiveness of Land Restoration Interventions in Dry Lands by Multitemporal Remote Sensing - A Case Study in Ouled DLIM (Marrakech, Morocco): ASSESSING LAND RESTORATION EFFECTIVENESS BY REMOTE SENSING. Land Degradation & Development 26. doi:10.1002/ldr.2307
